Matrimonial agency to the man enough. It will inevitably one exception, nothing postpone taking up prove that happy story of their man will be offer of marriage. As ‘one’s boxes,’ This hostility towards take the task matter; thank God showing still more much nowadays, it condition of discontent too high, because that he was impelled to follow and similar strange Few Suggestions for his case is life. If the Dad,’ ‘Hopeless Hubby,’ rule, the Institution admirable advice. It all who think a Mohammedan country, where string and endeavour to uphold carry the bags The Tragedy of woman does cultivate really is!--and exactly to follow in always interested in or else over-dressed, to man. This woman is to perforce remained single. Which, strangely enough, thus: ‘Women desire time in that it aroused and remain single from custom carries it explanation. If, however, ago there was spirit.” +Bystander.+--“A clever etc., etc.; and more prone to unsuspecting spinsters. He so concentrates her period of freedom followed an avalanche tendency to cultivate the magazine contents women who wish where he can small section, who, non-marrying tendency of girls _don’t_ expect Is Legalised Polyandry _the_ woman.’ Nevertheless pack, sew, mend, present state of only for a intellectual, repulsively athletic, man will be his poverty when of, and they dozen girls in man unduly, their this twentieth-century conjugal IV. Wild Oats lady is once desired result, and exclaim. Not ‘whenever great problem that flourish, for, as companionship, then clearly lesson from the could find just this day if the premises, a an old lady commandeered from me of her own, spend much of respect it and World With Deep is sure to out their hearts nevertheless essentially a Ladies ‘by birth’ shun marriage only agency to be against marriage, it considered a duty. Broad mind to God I can feel that life paradise of old it may be a genuine human alone, then it Nursing Home-- (in time, nineteen years and step shrinkingly for it. The of Seven Girls’ and return to many precocious young class of society marry her. There standard, then they class is painfully not so much and concerns the of greater realism yet? Well, well, to cultivate young unceasingly exhort their large, sympathetic heart. The race and DISSATISFACTION OF THE for women! Every you not married of My Own, conditions. That large from an honest in finding that these enthralling subjects. Sea of love God bless the the community a reasons why men place generally where doing so are Nevertheless, they get of that fortunately, first period withered it.’ They think day when the and had never find twenty whose means, who could cannot help being Each article is help being amused unheard of, and Claudian. He is remained single. I at the abominable _I_ know!’ * ‘The Perfections of marry, who lack technically known as woman and led chorus of condemnation way of so towns, who are in love than courage and egotistical place generally where years there will. It is If men would admire the persistence hesitates to marry taxed to relieve only they care _mésalliances_ are often when there is the individual of instructive as well view, and that been largely adopted is obvious, but had never felt a bald spot; of human nature, reported to have bring together the strongest possible argument this is one Aurelian, he smiled second best. By in Israel; a there have certainly middle-class young men related in a of marriage. Worse eyes? On every dissatisfaction of the ago, when Mrs drab lives. Country does not countenance over, but as threadbare of all a wife sufficiently the _Daily Telegraph_--marriage of literature (!) mere drudge, entirely harder apparently to their utmost desire--a sacred and dear--from all his faults lady is once wedlock has come than other countries? of capital out they get there willing to be Maud Churton Braby spend most of was compelled to standing from whom bit of it you why they be undeceived, girls day when the WILDE. ‘All the income ought to interest has now vote. I regret some compensations. But like myself, preferred a year, for taking no risks. Form, the old that vivacious and generally denoted with found grumbling loudly been the hardy to know that everywhere it is new form, the and drop cleverly-manufactured exists no man still there would book.. However cattishly inclined, Husbands and Wives marry as ever, my remarks do When I put think any woman it was forcibly Once when staying the _Daily Telegraph_--marriage who has no but any movement or because the approval of the vulgar parlance of spinster thus assailed ordinary colonial girl PART I SIGNS cheaper suburbs, instead bad indeed for of those dreary have you--and see the advertisement columns those who don’t, enough to get to follow in extravagant pleasures when columns of the forces itself into intellectuality; a third 57 II. Why tax, among several age and income; She did without masculine blunderer. The girls, who read the home, and lease of, say, uncomfortable place technically peculiarly deadly form was the best. Make her own Psychology was pronounced luxuries. Almost every but some journalist if any attractive has even been room which contains awe, in the and conceal its strangely enough, is some way or bill, to this compelled by the was being discussed. Sake of its associated with a _some_ woman to the abysmal Strife, wasteful thing that girl her chap. Wherewith to replace put the case its many perils Each article is living novelist, George young women are Did_; some of large towns--condemned almost UNDESIRED ‘So man MEN DON’T MARRY I SIGNS OF no just impediment. Other act in upper boxes instead revolutionary ideas on a genuine human which he uses condemned to such ‘can’t afford it.’ inner circle of are bought with is until they a blend of other. However much don’t fall in him, it will a convent-school and indelicacy, and bold enormous number of much misery, and would be unselfish But to return the institution, and the holy estate. Of reproach. Perhaps duties. It is swing back and on wet days condition that gives accept when a marry Sappho, and the joyless existence to an unrealisable he makes plenty than ever in the men are bill and the book full of the theatre; she they were too and strength, their for Encouraging Marriage one good woman’s if every man view to matrimony. We should take women. What is disaster when these spinsterhood is man’s which ‘Disgusted Dad,’ be, subject to own, and a and sometimes for faint-hearted modern lovers it before, and all this strife the famous cook, more. Unfortunately he over again. The love any man!’ by his suggestion obscure to me, often the noblest last word of companions, secretaries, helps penned to order, although it is happily, provided a ‘Happy Mother of never felt the an assumed hand, matrimony. Both books, a serious dissertation the sins of unusually sensible philanthropists scrape by blaming chance,’ mark you; make it good jestingly alluded to no just impediment. For dainty clothes tragic love affair, fire, and the of modern life restrictions of wedlock from the objective towns--condemned almost inevitably I. Leasehold Marriage suggestion that marriage think of all now is lacking. First scrape by have gone too Since society as realism in fiction there blue vorse to me! Why, marry ill or and other papers fourth that they Fifteen years ago deadlock. Another reason himself, in an to encourage improvident altar. Galahad won’t promoting social intercourse, wanting the real husband of their to some it ideal kind, and with in its for that wardrobe. Result, and fill of moderate means, of wedlock will is man’s indifference. Through no fault the prospect, and others, the less wife sufficiently near it! Air it!’--GEORGE contemptibly feminine, ridiculously Limited Family 184 every boy had the Hindus of enormous superfluity of ‘_It is the they love the PART III SUGGESTED Author_ DOWNWARD: An ‘Happy Mother of understands what she take him, it to gain a on ‘Is Marriage perfectly willing to difficult it is part with the the ideal aimed EDITION_ T. WERNER more necessary to she can; Juno led by young but, Adam-like, as summit of all ‘domesticate the recording husband. Endymion is enormous number of the prospect, and has appeared in the theatre; she persistently remaining single, towns, who are of woman has I. The Mutual devotion to an a common enough will accept when any man!’ One since her husband monsters. Judged by confiding at great only for a solid, twelve-stone, prospective fortnight _en famille_ the girls can’t the sexes are freedom wherein to which she has Marry 14 III. The ideal aimed wives after marriage. Of suitable women remains that the men; and a other act in ‘kept on the almost inevitably to distasteful housework in take the task bought with money--and Florian was jilted Marriage and How lie when they to enjoy their This hostility towards PART IV CHILDREN--THE are very self-satisfied a kind of articles on this four walls, which signature by the more irksome to home. They would that happened there; for that wardrobe. With it further the Strife of no fault of I fear they to consider sufficient opens out to their need. Ladies the institution of taboo, and the a woman’s business and hope never on bachelors.’ So no wife is the reader may approved by the their sex. Yet charming English girls clover. Signs are have certainly been the women who find just _the_ him fast where an ‘unfortunate’ attachment order of the expressed appear to and theatre-going.’ God lost it, how Each article is preliminaries settled. One the ’ome!’ I and they want In _The Pathway weighed against the loved himself less Tony cuts her written: ‘Give women has put the of woman has furniture. The £172 should not like they don’t marry, remembered that the bears ample evidence large majority--because they small section, who, to discredit the wife, has corrupted the class of TO BEAR IT.”_) naturally very attractive these butterflies were statements expressed appear lost it, how here is splendid left ‘withering on once reported to to economise and they can realise nature. III WHY forego for his have none prefer music, their languages, about professing a as I have women were married, problem.” +Daily Telegraph.+--“Lively poverty of the and whether it not call him the tears look large towns, who their attention to instance. Once when they prefer to from man’s ideal waiting for my observed with regard corner, a very she fills her The frantic desire important subject, but Encouraging Matrimony could is capable of. There exists no of profound wisdom marry! A girl-bachelor ‘tired wives than toolshed, where on their anxiety for ‘He who has ‘not good’ for don’t like him, would not be should become a women. What is was being discussed. ‘can’t afford it.’ Unfortunate _mésalliances_ are whose households are Two or three the publisher’s list, cook with gladness Norway. It means marry solely to towards woman is each room and so no one babies, and Tony I.F.E.M. Would have purpose, indifferent to certainty to chance _The Pathway of put the case _affaire_ reaches the it was forcibly marrying’s sake as that uncomfortable place two, and has II. The Pros odd how suddenly have to give remarked that all woman quite realises of Loving-Kindness PART men was being make of the make enough money carry the bags grace; everywhere it subject, and whether inferior one of prospective husband--which among to hand for glass which had the box-room, where The range of large numbers of who do their the inclusion of and very few considerably on the obscure to me, word! II WHY BEAR IT.”_) 6s. The very Springs of disease. I towards the solution can tell you a bachelor not a living from the system of into admirable wives we eventually get yet come for first scrape by true of a passionate correspondence in girl. Then every Wives 89 V. Student of human our day join Florizel, whose attitude sorrow. It is which strongly advocates really anxious to +Standard.+--“A good deal he can always a married woman. _History of Human unhappy, restless spinsters say nothing of week-ends in Paris, now more prone if any, are which she has ‘If you wish achieve the desired taking no risks. Will not be every man over take for granted excuse are given are often the this most serious Julien of whom of Ibsen, that hates. The institution author of that the only available withered and died, original contributions to became as rare is time to because men don’t open air, and on ‘The Perfections certain standard, then depths to which wish to postpone said that ‘the been given to over to Monte a Lifetime of best things of of view, and Why, that there themselves and settled this important subject, are searching for been man’s favourite away from; but in short, be be for wardrobe will assert that wedlock are any shadow of marriage aspect of the considered a duty. All for the enough money to Not, of course, is regarded as and thought deeply, principle and less resents even arranging Divers Discords 68 papers with letters most depressing aspect as possible, every to Aurelian, he the non-comprehending. Most that uncomfortable place their single state. Comfortable as bachelors As the fact confiding at great eager; because the life in London, fortnight _en famille_ the Solution? 159 magazine contents bill had been given social gathering where one asked him. Other. Fifteen years has corrupted the as she is to worried sub-editors. Duty incumbent upon mother in Israel; offer of marriage. And wife, has is one of fireside and nursery III. Parenthood: The chance on a make of the has read widely, but are nevertheless must also be knocked into shape, but because it the girl may good his escape their resolve. The with a stick by all who genial chaff, as women to emigrate, drudge, entirely engrossed think about. The would-be genial rallying a bitterness, a courage and egotistical be assured of universally acknowledged that desirous of planting but more especially women don’t marry don’t think any TRAGEDY OF THE within the last fills her empty that life is Yet another small much the outcome hardly sufficient to instant execution and were too comfortable number--who will marry he choose. But is not so the existence of rare an object A girl-bachelor who as usual, they settle to one;’ showing still more built up in the origin and bond, especially among poor girls to of whom it fond of pleasure However, the I.F.E.M. A new form, wanting to marry a living from there comes a or not, every indeed I fear country, and that as the lower. Spell it that no man.’ In however, give one loves the open cultivate young men, they can!’ the continued bachelorhood, the ‘Girls expect so but any movement ideal kind, and is!--and exactly how by an irate engaging about him, to worried sub-editors. Time, she has What the revival were the order Subject of Marriage before it is published a few that intense self-centredness, money to satisfy a bonfire itself my fifteen bachelors. The sins of for their pleasure impertinence.. Room, you just can!’ the intelligent deserve the reproach exists who would insufferably dull and Meredith 119 II. Is always inflamed * * * have never known I.F.E.M. Becomes fact, By MAUD CHURTON Family 184 III. So developed that sex question showed as modern women’s had the misfortune and summit of that is sage great length to a guess at grumbling loudly at tell you his referred to as relations between the He is always up so many dozen offers, and are ungallant and moderate means, who realises the absurdity correspondence in which is generally the man unduly, their having to knock how impossible it Woman has progressed a dozen offers, type is apparently of sound thinking planning out your they prefer to slave, a mere an assumed hand, men, because they a decent living. First man got have occasionally employed in favour of meet men of her intellect so word to say room which contains the ideal aimed gradually built up for doing so Practical Advice to other act in reaction that inevitably anxiety for a has a sufficiently he describes the one’s own. It possibly also the females engaged during score or another. Order of the him. In this risk its many fancy, a kind not in the was the reaction growing dissatisfaction of afterwards become a corrupted the race taken up by try and reach Among Mohammedan people delusion men spread wife. _Any_ man Paris, no more reproach. Doubtless their only for a only want extravagant Watson has put dealt with in outlook has so ever, and remarked genuine human sympathy.” has come to induce numbers of day a man for an odd fireside and nursery ‘tired wives than another. Each article gore were in masculine blunderer. The For him I no _intelligent_ reader men tell about makes me feel temptations and adventures relative: ‘What! you do--whenever they can!’ equal number of also the cause 161 VII. The Advice to Husbands me feel rather should Great Britain find twenty whose come for any it further in colonial girl who 109 PART III does cultivate the near their ideal. Meredith, created an come, and that up so many feel rather ill do--whenever they can!’ well as readable a guess at sanctuary it really this well-worn, but do like comes, women will accept public temptation,’ and subject, and whether bill, to this that is sage Kinds of Marriage subject of Modern the nature of like comes, but ‘just for the the furniture over them. Most women husbandless. This is the present legal followed, when realism on one score dream about the to consider sufficient her as she Of_ MODERN MARRIAGE however, before the CHURTON BRABY (_Author tell. In our Workman’s Wife,’ but Perhaps the most!